---
layout: default
title: Reading Guide
permalink: /reading_guide/
---

# Reading science textbooks and scientific papers

The TBL module structure is based on students working through the preparatory readings at the beginning of each module in preparation for the RAP (Readiness Assessment Process) that takes place on the first day of a new module. This allows the class to focus the rest of the module on higher level concepts in team activities. Reading scientific texts requires time and effort, and the preparatory readings at the beginning of each of the seven modules are no exception. They will usually take at least 6-8 hours of focused time. Most people, including myself, have to read scientific material more than once and have to be strategic about how to read in order to get the most out of it. This is because the information content is typically very high and often includes specialized vocabulary that may be unfamiliar. Like most things, reading scientific text and textbooks is a skill that takes practice and benefits from taking a deliberate, planned approach. The following steps are intended to provide some starting suggestions from which to build your own reading strategy. Keep in mind that what works best is slightly different from person to person.

## 1. Plan your reading

Don't try to read everything at once. Divide the reading into chunks of 10-15 pages each and space out your reading over 1-2 days if possible. Be deliberate about when and where you will do your reading assignments. Put it on your To-Do list and choose times when you are most alert, usually during daylight or early evening hours. Select a location that is quiet, free of distractions, and well lighted (e.g. the library). If the text is in a digital format, consider printing it out to work on a hard-copy. Many people find reading on a screen more difficult or distracting. Try to get into a routine of a time and place for reading class materials to help you focus your attention.

## 2. Prepare for reading

Prepare to take notes. The vast majority of people have a hard time absorbing information without taking notes. This is especially important with text that has new vocabulary and concepts. Reserve a separate place in your notes where you can easily keep track of unfamiliar terms and add to this list as you come across new ones during the reading (the **vocabulary list**). Do the same for keeping track of questions you might have during reading (the **questions list**). Don't be alarmed if these grow long when first diving into a new subject. They are very useful study guides to get sense for a new topic. Consider making a mark each time you come across the same term to get a sense for how frequently it occurs in the readings. Chances are that jargon words that only appear once are not actually that important for overall understanding. Periodically take a break to revisit your vocabulary list and see if you can get a sense for the most common new words by checking Wikipedia (the summary at the top of a Wikipedia page is usually a great start to give you an idea what the term is about, but take it with a little grain of salt as Wikipedia is not always 100% accurate). Some of the most important terms may also be defined in the text itself in a highlight box or somewhere in the margins. Try to make a few notes in your own words on the vocabulary list to help yourself remember what a term means. If there are terms you can't easily find information on, make a note to ask your instructor for clarification but don't dwell on it - like the rare jargon words, these are unlikely to be all that important for overall understanding.

## 3. Preview reading

At the beginning of a chunk of reading, start by reading the title, introduction, and headings, glance at charts and pictures, and read the summary. Add unfamiliar terms from the headings to your vocabulary list and look them up after you finished scanning the reading (careful about wikipedia rabbit holes). A 5-10 minute preview often reduces the total time you spend reading and increases comprehension. Some people find it helpful to turn sub-headings into reading questions at this point already (see details in the paragraph below) prior to diving into the text.

## 4. Read actively

For each block of text, turn headings into questions before reading. This will give you a specific purpose for your reading, resulting in better comprehension. For example, the subheading "Requirements for growth - Physical requirements: a) Temperature" may become *What are the temperature requirements and limits for life?*. By reading to answer the question, your focus will be greatly improved. Good educational writing often deliberately presents headings as questions for this exact purpose. If something is not making sense, try reading it out loud. That can often help you process the material in a new way. Monitor your comprehension. Stop to check your understanding of the material at regular intervals by asking yourself **What was this paragraph about?**, **How did it speak to the question from the last heading?**. If the material is easy to understand, you may be able to wait until the end of each main division of the text to summarize what you have learned. If the text is more difficult, you may need to pause at the end of each paragraph. It is generally best to wait until you finish reading a paragraph or small section before you begin to mark your text, underline or take notes on the section to prevent "rainbow text" (i.e. completely highlighted text which may look thoroughly read but is usually not that useful for later review). The idea with highlighting is that you could re-read JUST the highlighted portion in a month and get the gist of the paragraph without having to re-read the whole paragraph. When taking notes, try to think about answering the two questions above. Keep your notes short and focused on overall take-away without going into too much detail. Make sure to delegate your vocabulary questions to the **vocabulary list**. Consider adding some or all of the header questions to your **questions list** and add other questions that come up along the way to this list for later review.

## 5. Review material

Review immediately what you read. After you complete a reading chunk (max 10-15 pages at once), take five to ten minutes (or more) to review what you just read before forgetting takes place. Use the headings and vocabulary to prompt your memory. Then jot down a short summary (in your own words, not quotes from book) of what you just read, and make some broad observations about how it connects to other things you knew or have read or any feelings you might have about what you've read. To test your recall of the reading, try to answer the questions on your **questions list** without looking at the text. If you need to look back at the text, underline the corresponding question(s) in your list to remind yourself that you need to revisit them again later. If you can answer all the question(s), you are doing well on recalling the paragraphs. This is also a good time to make some notes for class. Write down questions that you want to ask from your instructor or teammates (to understand a concept or to discuss how it connects to something else you've read, etc.). Write down any observations or opinions you want to share with the class or your team. You may want to include page numbers and quotes that may be useful for discussion.

Depending on your own learning preferences, you may also want to do some or all of the following to review the information and concepts covered in the reading:

 - prepare a concept map by listing key points, enclosing them in boxes or circles, and drawing lines with arrows between concepts to show connections
- recite the information out loud or write information you struggle with down again in different words
- meet up with other people in your class to discuss what you read, take turns explaining it to each other and compare notes on your vocabulary and questions list
